Tips for finding and applying for a job
As you learned previously, connecting with security professionals on social media and joining different cybersecurity conferences and organizations are two ways to use your network to find job opportunities. You were also introduced to a few online resources to help you find jobs in the security field. In this reading, you’ll learn about specific sites and resources you can use to apply for jobs.

ZipRecruiter
ZipRecruiter
 is a popular website for job seekers and employers worldwide; the website helps connect job seekers with available roles in their industry. When you enter the site, you’re asked to fill out specific geographical and work preference questions to help ZipRecruiter match you with opportunities in your field. Then you can upload your resume on the platform and search for jobs in your industry. Employers can reach out to you directly, too, based on your profile and responses.

Indeed 
Indeed
 is another popular website that helps connect job seekers with available roles in their industry. When you first enter the site, search for jobs using the job title, a keyword, or a company that you’re interested in working at. Then, specify your preferred job location. You can also upload your resume on Indeed, which allows recruiters to reach out to you if your resume is a match for a job opportunity.

Monster®
Monster
 is a frequently used website in both the United States and internationally that helps connect job seekers with available roles in their industry. Similar to the other job search sites, search for a role using the job title, keyword, or company you’re interested in working at, as well as your preferred working location. If you upload your resume to Monster, recruiters might reach out to you if your resume is a match for a job opportunity. 

LinkedIn® 
LinkedIn® professional services is a social networking site where you can also find jobs in the cybersecurity field. When you first enter LinkedIn®, click on the “jobs” tab. From here, enter the location where you’d want to work and the particular job title that you’d be interested in. LinkedIn is also a great way to learn about a company's culture, values, and even community initiatives. This can help you determine if the company is the right fit for you.





The interview process
You previously learned how to create a resume and cover letter to apply for security jobs. In this reading, you’ll concentrate on how to prepare for the interview process. Although the interview process can vary widely from one company to another, most companies follow the steps described in this reading.

Getting contacted by a recruiter
After you apply for a job, you might receive a call, an email, or a message from a recruiter expressing interest in your application and asking to schedule a call or meeting. Reply as soon as possible to show that you’re responsive and interested in the position.

Preliminary interview or phone screening
In most cases, the first step in the interview process is a preliminary interview, sometimes referred to as a phone screening. This usually involves a conversation with a recruiter over the phone, in person, or on a video call.

The preliminary interview is typically shorter than a regular interview. The recruiter will share information about the company and the job opening. Then they’ll ask you questions to get to know you and your work experience better. The recruiter will also provide time for you to ask questions about the role and the company, so be sure to prepare a few questions before the interview. For example, you might ask: “What is the work culture like at the company?” or “What will my average day be like in this role?” Asking questions helps demonstrate your interest and will help you determine whether the job will be a good fit for you. 

After the interview, send a thank-you email to the recruiter within 24 hours. Express your gratitude for their time and briefly restate why you would be a good fit for the position.

Additional interviews
Once you’ve passed the preliminary interview, you might be invited for multiple additional interviews. These interviews are typically with the hiring manager. You might also meet with other individuals on the team and be required to go through a technical interview. You’ll learn more about technical interviews in a later reading.

This interview is often longer than the preliminary interview. It could be in person, over the phone, or on a video call.

The interview usually opens with introductions and a brief description of the company and job position. Then, the interviewer will ask you questions about your background, skills, and experience. Next, you’ll have an opportunity to ask questions about the company, the role, and job expectations.

Finally, you’ll learn about next steps in the hiring process.

There might be multiple rounds of interviews, depending on how the company’s interview process works. These additional interviews could be longer, include future teammates or other employees at the company, and feature questions that take more time and thought to answer.

As with the preliminary interview, send a thank-you note to the people you interviewed with after each round of interviews. 

Final offer
Now comes the exciting part: Receiving a job offer. The company might reach out to you by phone or email. After the company extends their initial offer, you’ll need to decide whether or not to accept it or negotiate for a higher salary or other benefits. Feel free to ask for a day or two to make your decision.

Building perseverance
If the company lets you know that you didn’t get the job, take a moment to process your emotions. If you’d like, you can let the company know that you appreciate the opportunity to be considered and that you’d be interested in any future roles that might be a good fit. You can also ask for feedback on what you could do better next time. 





Prepare for technical interviews
You previously learned about the interview process, which generally consists of an introductory interview, a second interview with a hiring manager, and a panel interview. In this reading, you’ll focus more on the technical interviews that take place during the interview process. Although technical interviews can vary from one company to another, the concepts covered in this reading will help prepare you for any technical interview.

What are technical interviews?
After you’ve applied for a job in cybersecurity and receive interest from a recruiter, you might be invited to an introductory interview, a second interview with a hiring manager, and a panel interview. Additionally, you might be asked to participate in a technical interview. The main difference between technical interviews and other interviews is the focus on required knowledge of specific tools.

Python
Python is a programming language that serves as an important tool in security, and you might be asked about it during a technical interview. It will be important to mention your basic knowledge of Python. You might recall from this program that Python is popular for its ease of use as well as its extensive libraries and integrations. It can be applied to various security tasks that require automation. During your interview, you might be asked to whiteboard a pseudo code in Python. Being able to confidently use Python terminology during an interview can help you stand out as a potential candidate. This will let the interviewer know that you have a solid understanding of what Python is and what it can be used for.

General techniques
During your technical interview, you might be expected to demonstrate basic knowledge of various general security concepts. For example, you might need to show familiarity with security frameworks, which are guidelines used for building plans to help mitigate risk and threats to data and privacy. When discussing security frameworks, it would be helpful to mention your knowledge of specific NIST frameworks, such as the Cybersecurity Framework (CSF). Another technical concept for you to discuss during a technical interview is network security. You might recall that network security is the practice of keeping an organization’s network infrastructure secure from unauthorized access. Reviewing the different technical concepts you’ve learned throughout this program is a good way to prepare for a technical interview. It will sharpen your skills and help you leave a good impression on the interviewer. 

Additionally, it may be a good idea to write the entire question down on paper before answering. Often, technical interview questions have multiple parts to cover. People sometimes rush to give an answer and show their knowledge but not fully cover everything that the question asks. Writing down the question can help you ensure you have the question right and are able to provide a structured response. 

Possible technical interview questions
Every technical interview will be different, depending on the company and the interviewers. But here are a few possible technical interview questions to help you prepare: 

What is the TCP/IP model? 

The TCP/IP model is a framework used to visualize how data is organized and transmitted across a network. 

What is the OSI model?

The OSI model stands for open systems interconnection (OSI) model. It is a standardized concept that describes the seven layers computers use to communicate and send data over the network. 

What are SIEM tools and what are they used for? 

SIEM tools are security information and event management tools that are used by security professionals to identify and analyze security threats, risks, and vulnerabilities. 





Apply the STAR method during interviews
You’ve been learning about different techniques and strategies to use during future interviews for jobs in the cybersecurity field. In this reading, you’ll learn more details about the STAR method for answering interview questions. Implementing this strategy will help you answer interview questions with confidence and clarity.

The STAR method
Star method acronym
When interviewing for a job, it can be challenging to convey the right details about your professional history and skills to your interviewers. Using the STAR method can help you share your success stories effectively and strategically. STAR stands for Situation, Task, Action, and Result. Using this method enables you to describe potential challenges you faced in previous roles and gives you the opportunity to show how you thoughtfully approached solving those problems from start to finish. 

Situation
The situation is the project you worked on or a challenge that you had to overcome. For example, perhaps you had to manage a disgruntled customer’s negative feedback about your company,  a system error on your work device that slowed down a customer transaction, or being left alone in the office for an extended period of time. Fully describing the situation allows the interviewer to gain a clear understanding of the challenge you had to overcome.  

Task
The task outlines the key responsibilities or role you played in solving the challenge described in the situation phase of the STAR method. Specifying what the task is provides clarity about what your objectives were in this scenario.

Action 
The action describes the exact steps you took to resolve the challenging situation you described in the beginning of the STAR method. The action is crucial to the STAR method because it allows the employer to understand what choices you made to achieve your desired outcome during a real conflict or challenge. Employers want employees who can think fast and make decisions that help solve problems. 

Result
Finally, sharing the result of your challenge or example shows the employers how the situation was resolved as a direct result of the actions you took. When participating in an interview, you want to make sure that any example you give with the STAR method ends in a positive result. Positive results show an employer that you are someone who has demonstrated an ability to successfully resolve issues and may lead an employer to offer you a job. Of course, not all situations have completely positive outcomes; if an employer asks you about a situation that didn’t have a positive outcome, try to focus on what you learned from the situation and how that experience helped you become a better employee. 





Prepare for interviews
Great news! You’ve submitted your application and received a follow-up email requesting an interview.  The work isn’t over yet, though—you still have a lot of preparation to do. That’s what you’re going to learn about in this reading!

Prepare for the introductory call
It’s important to showcase your best self in the introductory phone call. In this conversation, you’ll talk with the recruiter or hiring manager about yourself, the kind of work or training you have, and why you want the job. You might also be asked specifically about your salary requirements. For this question, it’s a good idea to prepare in advance and conduct an internet search for “average salary for entry-level security analysts.” 

Do your research
Make sure you’ve done your research on the company. When the interviewer asks why you’d be a good fit for the job, they want to learn why you’re interested in cybersecurity and why you want to work at that company specifically. 

Prepare for the second round
Your second-round interview will focus more on what you can offer as an entry-level security analyst. You’ll likely discuss yourself here, too, but you’ll also be going into detail about your knowledge of the profession. You’ll want to cover the same material you prepared for your introductory call, but you’ll also need to fully review your accomplishments in the security industry. Don’t worry if you have no prior professional cybersecurity experience. You can discuss the information you’ve learned in this certificate program. 

Depending on where you and your interviewer are located, the second-round interview might be over the phone, via video conference, or in person. In-person interviews often last an hour or so, but if you traveled for your interview or the company likes to bring candidates in for all of the remaining interview stages at once, you might complete your panel interview with a group that day as well.

Panel interview
During the panel interview, you’ll meet with two or more people and discuss yourself and your ability to contribute to the organization. If you’re nervous about this, remind yourself that the team brought you in for the interview for a reason. When you feel confident in your abilities, you’re better able to showcase your knowledge about the security industry and demonstrate your ability to work well with a team. 

Be sure to engage with each panelist by giving them your full attention during the interview. Maintaining eye contact can help you express confidence, but for those who cannot do so, actively engaging with each panelist in your own way is just as important. 

It’s likely that each panelist will ask you at least one question during the interview. It’s okay to address the whole panel when answering a question, rather than only directing your response to the person who asked the question. 

More resources to help you prepare
There’s an endless supply of job-preparation resources available to you. Here are some great ones to get you started:

Interview tips from Google
. This resource from the Google Careers team provides best practices and advice on how to prepare and ace your interviews at Google, but of course these tips will work at any company!

Interviewing techniques for persons with disabilities
. This resource from the Job Accommodation Network (JAN) offers helpful advice on navigating the interview process for individuals with disabilities. 





Prepare for interviews with Interview Warmup
Now that you have developed new skills and knowledge in cybersecurity, it’s time to start preparing for interviews. 
Interview Warmup
 is a tool that helps you practice answering questions to become more confident and comfortable throughout the interview process.

A practice question on Interview Warmup.
Get started
Follow these steps to start a five-question practice interview related to cybersecurity:

Go to 
grow.google/interview-warmup
.
https://grow.google/certificates/interview-warmup/?utm_source=gDigital&utm_medium=ownedsocial&utm_campaign=certs&utm_content=interviewwarmup

Click Start practicing.

Select Cybersecurity to open an additional menu.

Click Start.

The interview lasts about 10 minutes, and the questions will vary with each attempt. During each interview session, you will be asked two background questions, one behavioral question, and two technical questions. You are encouraged to try as many practice interviews as you want.

You can also review complete lists of 
cybersecurity interview questions
 or 
general interview questions
 if you'd like to focus on a particular topic.

 https://www.coursera.org/learn/prepare-for-cybersecurity-jobs/supplement/Fn8MB/prepare-for-interviews-with-interview-warmup

 https://grow.google/certificates/interview-warmup/category/general/all-questions/

How it works
Interview Warmup asks you interview questions to practice answering verbally. Your answers will be transcribed in real time, allowing you to review how you responded. In addition, Interview Warmup's machine learning algorithm can detect insights that can help you learn more about your answers and improve the way you communicate.

Here are a few examples of questions Interview Warmup might ask:

What are your career goals for the next five years?

What processes can you use to ensure user data is protected?

Name two types of common cybersecurity attacks?

What are two internal factors that can increase the chances of security risks?

What do security information and event management tools enable security analysts to do?

In Python, what’s the difference between break and continue?

Here are some of the insights that Interview Warmup provides:

Talking points: The tool lets you know which topics you covered in your answer, such as your experience, skills, and goals. You’ll also be able to view other topics that you might want to consider covering.

Most-used words: The tool highlights the words you used most often and suggests synonyms to broaden your word choices.

Job-related terms: The tool highlights the words you used that are related to the role or industry in which you are preparing to work. You’ll also be able to view an entire list of job-related terms that you might want to consider including in your answer.

Interview Warmup gives you the space to practice and prepare for interviews on your own. Your responses will be visible only to you, and they won’t be graded or judged.





Learn more about developing an elevator pitch
When interviewing with potential employers, it’s important to communicate who you are, your value as a security professional, and what qualities you’re searching for in a potential job. A simple way to deliver this information succinctly is with an elevator pitch. An elevator pitch is a brief summary of your experience, skills, and background that should be communicated in 60 seconds or fewer.

Although an elevator pitch is often specific to an idea or a product, you can also use it to sell yourself as a professional to potential employers. In an interview, a strong elevator pitch can be used to stand out to your interviewer. It can be used to help explain why you’re a good fit for the role or to answer the popular interview question “tell me about yourself.” This reading helps you prepare your elevator pitch to express the value you can provide as an entry-level security analyst or a more experienced cybersecurity professional. 

Provide an introduction
Start by providing an introduction. Introduce yourself and give a brief overview of your professional background. Explain some job roles you’ve had, your years of work experience, and the types of industries you’ve worked in. If this is your first job in security, mention some of your past roles and skills used for those roles that can translate to success in the security field. Some of these skills can include attention to detail, goal-orientedness, and good collaboration skills.

Describe your career interests and transferable skills
Even if you’re interviewing for your first internship or job in security, it’s important to clarify that this is your desired career. For example, you could say, “I want to apply my excellent skills for collaborating with others, and my attention to detail, to help the security team protect company data and assets.” To determine which transferable skills to highlight in your elevator pitch, consider ones that you have already developed and how they might apply to your goals as a security professional, such as problem-solving, communication, and time management. 

Express your excitement
This is where you share your passion for the field and why you want to work in the industry. If you’re motivated to help an organization defend itself against hackers, mention that. This is also a good time to talk about your goals. 

For example, you could say, “I love security because it gives me the opportunity to safeguard valuable information from malicious actors attempting to cause unnecessary harm to people and organizations. Long term, I’d love to develop a security and hacker mindset to play my part in defending against the constantly evolving threat actor tactics and techniques.”

Communicate your interest in the company 
Communicating why you are interested in the company—and not just the role—is a great way to help the interviewer recognize that you are knowledgeable about the company. This helps you to establish a rapport with the interviewer and shows that you’ve done your due diligence before coming to the interview. 

For example, if you were interviewing for a position for Google’s security team, you could say, “Being a member of Google’s security team helps protect millions of people’s private and sensitive information. As a long-time Google products user, I’m looking forward to the opportunity to be able to help safeguard those products and ensure customers have the best experience possible.”





Tips for interviewing remotely
A remote interview is an interview conducted virtually using video platform software. This type of interview provides an opportunity to connect with hiring managers and recruiters, even if you are not able to meet with them in person. Remote interviews also present challenges that in-person interviews do not, such as issues related to technology, lighting, and sound.

In this reading, you will learn tips to successfully prepare for a remote interview.

Test your technology
The first tip is to test the technology you’ll be using for the video. Different companies use different video platform software to host their remote interviews. Typically, the recruiter or hiring manager will reach out to you over the phone or email to share information about which software will be used for the interview.

Once you find out which software the company you’re interviewing with uses, you should download that software, if you don't have it already. Next, it's important to test your computer’s camera and microphone to ensure they work well with the video platform software a day or two before the interview. This allows you to resolve any technical issues you might have.  Be mindful of how to mute and unmute your microphone, just in case there is noise in your environment that you do not want the interviewer to hear. It’s also important to talk with the recruiter or hiring manager about a backup plan if the technology does not cooperate when it's time for the interview.

You’ll also want to test any technologies you need to use to ensure you are ready to interview, such as the closed caption feature on the app. Employers are typically happy to accommodate your needs if you're using assistive technology or need specific accommodations. If your internet service is not fast enough to allow for a video interview, you can request a phone interview instead.

Practice communicating through video
Communicating through video can be a challenge because there is a slight sound delay. The sound delay can make it difficult to know how long to wait for someone to stop speaking and for you to start. If you don’t have experience communicating through video, consider practicing with friends and family before the remote interview. This will help you learn how pauses affect video communication.

Create a professional background
Review your video background before the interview. Typically, you should avoid having an unorganized background or any objects that might distract the interviewer. When interviewing remotely, ensure that your area is well lit. You might want to rearrange your desk or furniture to ensure good lighting.

Always try to have light behind your camera so that it will shine on your face. If you can’t position your desk next to a window or don’t have enough light coming from the window, consider using artificial light. 

Additionally, you should do your best to limit background noise and use a headset, if possible. 

Dress appropriately
It’s a good idea to research the company you’re interviewing with to determine which type of interview outfit is suitable. You might need to wear formal business attire during your remote interview for a particular role and company, whereas for another position, more casual clothing might be appropriate. Typically, it is better to overdress than to underdress, especially for more traditional businesses. 

Look at the interviewer when speaking
When communicating through video, try to look at the interviewer when speaking instead of at the camera. Looking at the interviewer can give them the feeling that you’re engaged in the conversation and focused on what they’re saying. 

Sign in early
Before the interview, test your technology. This will help you feel confident that everything will work. However, technology and software can be unpredictable. If possible, sign in to your remote interview early to ensure everything is working properly.

Signing in early also indicates to your interviewer that you respect their time and are a punctual person. 





Terms and definitions from Course 8, Week 5
Rapport: A friendly relationship in which the people involved understand each other’s ideas and communicate well with each other

STAR method: An interview technique used to answer behavioral and situational questions 

Elevator pitch: A brief summary of your experience, skills, and background





