Cybersecurity, or security, is the practice of ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information by protecting networks, devices, people, and data from unauthorized access or criminal exploitation.

Key cybersecurity terms and concepts

Compliance is the process of adhering to internal standards and external regulations and enables organizations to avoid fines and security breaches.

Security frameworks are guidelines used for building plans to help mitigate risks and threats to data and privacy.

Security controls are safeguards designed to reduce specific security risks. They are used with security frameworks to establish a strong security posture.

Security posture is an organization’s ability to manage its defense of critical assets and data and react to change. A strong security posture leads to lower risk for the organization.

A threat actor, or malicious attacker, is any person or group who presents a security risk. This risk can relate to computers, applications, networks, and data.

An internal threat can be a current or former employee, an external vendor, or a trusted partner who poses a security risk. At times, an internal threat is accidental. For example, an employee who accidentally clicks on a malicious email link would be considered an accidental threat. Other times, the internal threat actor intentionally engages in risky activities, such as unauthorized data access.

Network security is the practice of keeping an organization's network infrastructure secure from unauthorized access. This includes data, services, systems, and devices that are stored in an organization’s network.

Cloud security is the process of ensuring that assets stored in the cloud are properly configured, or set up correctly, and access to those assets is limited to authorized users. The cloud is a network made up of a collection of servers or computers that store resources and data in remote physical locations known as data centers that can be accessed via the internet. Cloud security is a growing subfield of cybersecurity that specifically focuses on the protection of data, applications, and infrastructure in the cloud.

Programming is a process that can be used to create a specific set of instructions for a computer to execute tasks. These tasks can include:

Automation of repetitive tasks (e.g., searching a list of malicious domains)

Reviewing web traffic 

Alerting suspicious activity



https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary



Transferable and technical cybersecurity skills

Transferable skills

Communication: As a cybersecurity analyst, you will need to communicate and collaborate with others. Understanding others’ questions or concerns and communicating information clearly to individuals with technical and non-technical knowledge will help you mitigate security issues quickly. 

Problem-solving: One of your main tasks as a cybersecurity analyst will be to proactively identify and solve problems. You can do this by recognizing attack patterns, then determining the most efficient solution to minimize risk. Don't be afraid to take risks, and try new things. Also, understand that it's rare to find a perfect solution to a problem. You’ll likely need to compromise.

Time management: Having a heightened sense of urgency and prioritizing tasks appropriately is essential in the cybersecurity field. So, effective time management will help you minimize potential damage and risk to critical assets and data. Additionally, it will be important to prioritize tasks and stay focused on the most urgent issue.

Growth mindset: This is an evolving industry, so an important transferable skill is a willingness to learn. Technology moves fast, and that's a great thing! It doesn't mean you will need to learn it all, but it does mean that you’ll need to continue to learn throughout your career. Fortunately, you will be able to apply much of what you learn in this program to your ongoing professional development.

Diverse perspectives: The only way to go far is together. By having respect for each other and encouraging diverse perspectives and mutual respect, you’ll undoubtedly find multiple and better solutions to security problems. 

Technical skills

Programming languages: By understanding how to use programming languages, cybersecurity analysts can automate tasks that would otherwise be very time consuming. Examples of tasks that programming can be used for include searching data to identify potential threats or organizing and analyzing information to identify patterns related to security issues. 

Security information and event management (SIEM) tools: SIEM tools collect and analyze log data, or records of events such as unusual login behavior, and support analysts’ ability to monitor critical activities in an organization. This helps cybersecurity professionals identify and analyze potential security threats, risks, and vulnerabilities more efficiently.

Intrusion detection systems (IDSs): Cybersecurity analysts use IDSs to monitor system activity and alerts for possible intrusions. It’s important to become familiar with IDSs because they’re a key tool that every organization uses to protect assets and data. For example, you might use an IDS to monitor networks for signs of malicious activity, like unauthorized access to a network.

Threat landscape knowledge: Being aware of current trends related to threat actors, malware, or threat methodologies is vital. This knowledge allows security teams to build stronger defenses against threat actor tactics and techniques. By staying up to date on attack trends and patterns, security professionals are better able to recognize when new types of threats emerge such as a new ransomware variant. 

Incident response: Cybersecurity analysts need to be able to follow established policies and procedures to respond to incidents appropriately. For example, a security analyst might receive an alert about a possible malware attack, then follow the organization’s outlined procedures to start the incident response process. This could involve conducting an investigation to identify the root issue and establishing ways to remediate it.

https://www.comptia.org/certifications/security

Terms and definitions from Course 1, Week 1
Cybersecurity (or security): The practice of ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information by protecting networks, devices, people, and data from unauthorized access or criminal exploitation

Cloud security: The process of ensuring that assets stored in the cloud are properly configured and access to those assets is limited to authorized users

Internal threat: A current or former employee, external vendor, or trusted partner who poses a security risk

Network security: The practice of keeping an organization's network infrastructure secure from unauthorized access

Personally identifiable information (PII): Any information used to infer an individual’s identity

Security posture: An organization’s ability to manage its defense of critical assets and data and react to change 

Sensitive personally identifiable information (SPII): A specific type of PII that falls under stricter handling guidelines

Technical skills: Skills that require knowledge of specific tools, procedures, and policies 

Threat: Any circumstance or event that can negatively impact assets

Threat actor: Any person or group who presents a security risk

Transferable skills: Skills from other areas that can apply to different careers 