Data and asset classification
Protecting an organization’s business operations and assets from security threats, risks, and vulnerabilities is important. You previously learned what it means to have a security mindset. That mindset can help you identify and reduce security risks and potential incidents.

In this reading, you will learn about key data classification types and the difference between the low-level and high-level assets of an organization.

Classifying for safety
Security professionals classify data types to help them properly protect an organization from cyber attacks that negatively impact business operations. Here is a review of the most common data types:

Public data

Private data

Sensitive data

Confidential data

Public data
This data classification does not need extra security protections. Public data is already accessible to the public and poses a minimal risk to the organization if viewed or shared by others. Although this data is open to the public, it still needs to be protected from security attacks. Examples of public data include press releases, job descriptions, and marketing materials.

Private data
This data classification type has a higher security level. Private data is information that should be kept from the public. If an individual gains unauthorized access to private data, that event has the potential to pose a serious risk to an organization. 

Examples of private data can include company email addresses, employee identification numbers, and an organization’s research data. 

Sensitive data
This information must be protected from everyone who does not have authorized access. Unauthorized access to sensitive data can cause significant damage to an organization’s finances and reputation. 

Sensitive data includes personally identifiable information (PII), sensitive personally identifiable information (SPII), and protected health information (PHI). Examples of these types of sensitive data are banking account numbers, usernames and passwords, social security numbers (which U.S. citizens use to report their wages to the government), passwords, passport numbers, and medical information. 

Confidential data
This data classification type is important for an organization’s ongoing business operations. Confidential data often has limits on the number of people who have access to it. Access to confidential data sometimes involves the signing of non-disclosure agreements (NDAs)— legal contracts that bind two or more parties to protect information—to further protect the confidentiality of the data. 

Examples of confidential data include proprietary information such as trade secrets, financial records, and sensitive government data.

Asset classification
Asset classification means labeling assets based on sensitivity and importance to an organization. The classification of an organization's assets ranges from low- to high-level. 

Public data is a low-level asset. It is readily available to the public and will not have a negative impact on an organization if compromised. Sensitive data and confidential data are high-level assets. They can have a significantly negative impact on an organization if leaked publicly. That negative impact can lead to the loss of a company’s competitive edge, reputation, and customer trust. A company’s website address is an example of a low-level asset. An internal email from that company discussing trade secrets is an example of a high-level asset. 






Disaster recovery and business continuity
The role of a security professional is to ensure a company’s data and assets are protected from threats, risks, and vulnerabilities. However, sometimes things don’t go as planned. There are times when security incidents happen. You’ve already learned that security breaches can lead to financial consequences and the loss of credibility with customers or other businesses in the industry. 

This reading will discuss the need to create business continuity and disaster recovery plans to minimize the impact of a security incident on an organization’s business operations. Analysts need to consider the sequence of steps to be taken by the security team before business continuity and disaster recovery plans are implemented.  

Identify and protect 
Creating business continuity and disaster recovery plans are the final steps of a four-part process that most security teams go through to help ensure the security of an organization. 

First, the security team identifies the assets that must be protected in the organization. Next, they determine what potential threats could negatively impact those assets. After the threats have been determined, the security team implements tools and processes to detect potential threats to assets. Lastly, the IT or appropriate business function creates the business continuity and disaster recovery plans. These plans are created in conjunction with one another. The plans help to minimize the impact of a security incident involving one of the organization’s assets.

Business continuity plan
The impact of successful security attacks on an organization can be significant. Loss of profits and customers are two possible outcomes that organizations never want to happen. A business continuity plan is a document that outlines the procedures to sustain business operations during and after a significant disruption. It is created alongside a disaster recovery plan to minimize the damage of a successful security attack. Here are four essential steps for business continuity plans:

Conduct a business impact analysis. The business impact analysis step focuses on the possible effects a disruption of business functions can have on an organization. 

Identify, document, and implement steps to recover critical business functions and processes. This step helps the business continuity team create actionable steps toward responding to a security event.

Organize a business continuity team. This step brings various members of the organization together to help execute the business continuity plan, if it is needed. The members of this team are typically from the cybersecurity,  IT, HR, communications, and operations departments. 

Conduct training for the business continuity team. The team considers different risk scenarios and prepares for security threats during these training exercises. 

Disaster recovery plan
A disaster recovery plan allows an organization’s security team to outline the steps needed to minimize the impact of a security incident, such as a successful ransomware attack that has stopped the manufacturing team from retrieving certain data. It also helps the security team resolve the security threat. A disaster recovery plan is typically created alongside a business continuity plan. Steps to create a disaster recovery plan should include:

Implementing recovery strategies to restore software

Implementing recovery strategies to restore hardware functionality

Identifying applications and data that might be impacted after a security incident has taken place 





Juliana's story: Asset protection
Meet Juliana Soto, who recently completed an online cybersecurity certificate program and was hired as a cybersecurity analyst for Right-On-Time Payment Solutions, a fictional payment processing company allowing individuals to transfer money to friends and family. Right-On-Time also allows companies to accept payments from customers or organizations. 

In this reading, you will begin a three-part journey that follows Juliana as she takes on new roles and responsibilities within the cybersecurity team of her new company. 

Juliana decides that one of her first objectives is to gain a better understanding of the most important assets to the company by reviewing various company reading materials that will help her learn what is most valuable to them. On her first day, she is given reading materials to help her familiarize herself with the company. She learns that customers must create unique usernames and passwords and provide their full name or company name to sign up for the service as an individual. Business customers can also sign up for the service if they provide their employee identification number (EIN). Finally, customers must enter their bank account information or debit card number for payments to be accepted. 

Juliana discovers that this company handles a lot of personally identifiable information (PII) from its customers. This kind of information is considered sensitive data. Unauthorized access to it can lead to significant damage to the organization’s finances, its customers, and its reputation. Juliana realizes that the most important asset to this company is customer data. 

After finishing the required onboarding materials, she decides to put together an information lifecycle strategy. She learned about this when completing her online cybersecurity certificate program. 

Information lifecycle strategy
Juliana recalls the following steps of the information lifecycle:

The first step in the information lifecycle is to identify the important assets to the company, including sensitive customer information such as PII, financial information, social security numbers, and EINs. 

The second step is to assess the security measures in place to protect the identified assets and review the company’s information security policies. There are different components to this step, ranging from vulnerability scanning to reviewing processes and procedures that are already in place. Juliana is new to the company and might not be ready to conduct vulnerability scans. 

The third step of the information lifecycle is to protect the identified assets of the organization. Once again, this is only Juliana’s first day on the job. She asks her supervisor if she can observe a more senior security analyst for a day. This will give her the opportunity to learn how the security team monitors the company’s systems and network.

The last step of the security lifecycle is to monitor the security processes that have been implemented to protect the organization’s assets. She contacts her supervisor and gives them a detailed report of what she has learned on her first day. She requests to finish her day by monitoring a few of the systems that are in place. Her supervisor is impressed with her initiative and prepares Juliana to monitor the security systems. What a great first day for Juliana! 





Terms and definitions from Course 8, Week 1

Business continuity plan (BCP): A document that outlines the procedures to sustain business operations during and after a significant disruption

Confidential data: Data that often has limits on the number of people who have access to it

Disaster recovery plan: A plan that allows an organization’s security team to outline the steps needed to minimize the impact of a security incident

Private data: Information that should be kept from the public

Public data: Data that is already accessible to the public and poses a minimal risk to the organization if viewed or shared by others

Security mindset: The ability to evaluate risk and constantly seek out and identify the potential or actual breach of a system, application, or data

Sensitive data: A type of data that includes personally identifiable information (PII), sensitive personally identifiable information (SPII), and protected health information (PHI)





